---
layout: post
title: Phoenix... what happened?
---

Way back in the day, there was a solid open source web browser called
Mozilla.  Mozilla was great --- it was the alternative to Internet
Explorer, and it rendered pages fast. It had some neat features that
Internet Explorer just couldn't match: tabbed browsing, for
example. It had a lot of other features as well: an email client, IRC,
HTML editor, etc. For a while, Mozilla was king.

Mozilla might have made it to version 1.6 or so, but some developers
began to long for a browser that could take the best features of
Mozilla, and cut out all the excess: the email client, IRC client ---
anything that wasn't used for just browsing the web. They began
coding, and came up with **Phoenix**. Phoenix essentially
took the rendering engine from Mozilla, put it in a window, and added
a location bar. The goal, as they stated, was to have a browser that
loaded fast (both for web pages and from a cold start) and that didn't
have a large memory footprint, something that Mozilla couldn't get
around.

![screenshot of phoenix](/img/phoenixbrowser.png)

It got mixed reactions. Mozilla die-hards couldn't see the point in a
browser that didn't have all the amenities that Mozilla offered ---
session support, better bookmarks handling, etc. Others said that they
sometimes used Phoenix for "spur of the moment" browsing, but for
their regular routine still used Mozilla.  The criticism spurned a
feature that got added early on: extensions. Extensions were the
perfect solution to the complaints voiced by many. People who wanted
the bare-bones, lightning-fast browser would get what they wanted. And
people who needed more meat in their browser could get that too, with
all the lag and program heft that came with that.

It was about this time that the Mozilla foundation decided to take the
old email functionality from Mozilla, which was cut from Phoenix, and
package it as a new email client. They of course put a lot of work
into it, and set a standard for email clients. This software was
called Thunderbird. But now Phoenix got a name change, and became
Firebird. The new offering from Mozilla was the powerful combo of
**Firebird/Thunderbird**, and it was slick. Breaking up the
functionality allowed each piece to be faster and better at what it
did, and the two programs got more popular every day.

Unfortunately the name "Firebird" got Mozilla into a bit of a bind ---
it was already trademarked, and they were forced to change the name. A
lot of ideas were thrown around, and when the dust settled Firebird
became Firefox, the name it still holds today. Pretty soon thereafter,
Firefox hit 1.0.

![firefox 1.0 screenshot](/img/firefoxbrowser.png)

There was a trend leading up to this point, and continuing thereafter,
that I'm not sure if other people noticed or cared about: essentially,
*Firefox is becoming more and more like the Mozilla suite that it was
designed to eschew.* Firefox today is a hulking behemoth compared to
the lean browser it was when it was still Phoenix. Extensions,
designed to be easily installable, but optional, have become standard
features. Maybe it was just inevitable, but I'd like to think that
more decisive leadership could have kept the growth of Phoenix into
Firefox more a matter of stability and standards support rather than
feature bloat.

Firefox has, like Mozilla before it, become the swiss army knife of
web browsing. Extensions allow Firefox to be taken in any
direction. This would be fine as long as users that don't want the
fluff aren't burdened with the same long load times and poor
responsiveness that users with tons of extensions have.
